MongoDB Associate
Developer Exam Guide

Introduction
Congratulations for taking the first step in becoming MongDB certified! This exam guide
is designed to familiarize you with the details of the exam, the topics covered, and the
resources to help you prepare. When you pass this exam, you will attain the MongoDB
Associate Developer credential.

Candidate Description
A developer using MongoDB with their application must possess the knowledge and
skills necessary to utilize the database effectively. This means that they must have
hands-on experience completing day-to-day operational tasks needed to use MongoDB.
At a minimum, it’s recommended that the candidate has:
●​ Software engineering experience (any programming language)
●​ Successfully completed MongoDB training (or equivalent hands on experience
using MongoDB as the backing database for an application)

Exam Details
Number of questions: 53​
Question type: Multiple Choice and Multiple Response
●​ Multiple Choice: Has one correct response
●​ Multiple Response: Has two or three correct responses
○​ A prompt for choosing multiple responses will exist in the exam question
Time allotted: 75 Minutes
Exam fee: USD $150
Delivery Options: Online in a proctored environment
Prerequisites: None
Language: English
Other important information:
●​ Reference materials are not allowed during testing
●​ On occasion, there may be more than 53 questions on the exam. MongoDB
will place a handful of unscored questions on the exam for statistical
purposes. These unscored questions will not impact your exam score.
●​ If you have a disability and/or English is not your first language, we offer
extended time versions of all of our exams upon request. Once you schedule
your exam, please request extended time by sending your request to
certification@mongodb.com. We require 72 hrs of advanced notice for

2

extended time requests so we can make sure the proper arrangements are
made.

Scoring
MongoDB Certification exams have a pass/fail grading system that is determined
through statistical analysis performed by psychometricians. Candidates must meet a
required percentage to pass an exam. MongoDB does not publish the required
percentages for our certifications as each exam passing score is determined by unique
exam-specific statistical data. Candidates only need to obtain an overall required
percentage to pass an exam and do not need to obtain a passing percentage for each
specific domain.
Each domain has a specific weighting on the exam, which is shared in percentages
within each Exam Study Guide. Domain weightings are determined by a panel of
Subject Matter Experts who contributed to the development of the certification. Some
domains can have more or less exam questions than others depending on the analysis
of knowledge and skills required to show competency during the Job Task Analysis for
the certification.
Upon completion of an exam, candidates will receive a score report that states whether
they passed or failed the exam, in addition to the total percentage correct for each
domain. The purpose of the score report is to provide candidates with data behind their
strengths and where improvements can be made in their performance.
Candidates will receive one point for each scored exam question that is answered
correctly. Periodically, there will be extra exam questions called unscored exam
questions that do not impact your score. MongoDB field tests potential new exam
questions and analyzes their statistical performance before determining if they should
be used as scored exam questions on a future exam. The unscored items are not
identified to avoid bias.

Recommended Training and Resources
This guide is meant to provide an overview of the exam and should not be the only
means of preparation. While MongoDB training is not a prerequisite for this exam, and
training alone does not guarantee certification, we strongly recommend candidates
leverage the following MongoDB training courses and resources to prepare:

3

Free On-Demand Learning Path
We have curated Developer learning paths based on your preferred programming
language:
●​ Developer Learning Paths

Fee-Based Virtual Instructor Led Training
Short on time and have support to pay for training? We’ve got you covered.

●​ MDB100: MongoDB Database and Security
●​ MDB200: MongoDB Optimization and Performance
●​ MDB300: MongoDB Production Readiness
●​ DEV400: MongoDB Developer Extension

Additional Training Resources
●​ Associate Developer Practice Questions
●​ Associate Developer Certification Deep Dive Video
●​ MongoDB Documentation
●​ MongoDB Community Forums
●​ MongoDB University for Developers LinkedIn Group

Exam Study Guide
This study guide includes the domains and objectives that are assessed on the exam.
Exam questions are written at the objective level.

Section 1: MONGODB OVERVIEW AND THE DOCUMENT MODEL (8%)
1.1

Identify the set of value types MongoDB BSON supports.

1.2

Given three documents that are of different shape, identify which can co-exist in the
same collection.

Section 2: CRUD (51%)
2.1

Given a scenario with a type of structured document that needs to be inserted into a
database, identify properly and improperly formed insert commands.

2.2

Given an update scenario where an entire updated document (no update operators
used) is provided, identify the output and how the database changed state.

2.3

Given an update scenario where $set is used, identify the output and how the
database changed state.

4

2.4

Given a scenario about updating a document and information about where it should be
inserted if it does not exist, identify the upsert command that should be used.

2.5

Given a scenario where multiple documents need to be updated, identify the correct
update expression.

2.6

Given a findAndModify scenario where another operation is run concurrently, identify
the output and how the database changed state.

2.7

Given a scenario where a document should be deleted from the database, identify the
delete expression that should be used.

2.8

Given a scenario where a single document should be looked up by a simple equality
constraint (eg {x: 3}), identify the expression that should be used.

2.9

Identify documents matched by a query with an equality constraint on an array field.

2.10

Identify documents matched by an expression with relational operators in it.

2.11

Identify documents matched by an expression with $in.

2.12

Identify documents matched by an $elemMatch expression.

2.13

Identify documents matched by an expression that has several logical operators.

2.14

Given a query with a sort and limit, identify the correct output.

2.15

Identify the incorrect projection among a set of expressions.

2.16

Identify how to get all results from a cursor.

2.17

Identify the expressions used to count the number of documents matching a query.

2.18

Given an indexing scenario, identify the correct command for defining a search index.

2.19

Given a scenario, identify the correct search query.

2.20

Given an aggregation expression using $match, $group, identify the correct output.

2.21

Given an aggregation expression using $lookup, identify the correct output.

2.22

Given an aggregation expression using $out, identify the correct output.

Section 3: INDEXES (17%)
3.1

Given a query that is performing a collection scan, identify which index would improve
the performance of this query.

5

3.2

Given a query that is performing a collection scan on an equality match on an array
field, identify which index would improve the performance of this query.

3.3

Given a query with no constraint and a sort of two fields that is doing collection scan,
identify which index would improve the performance of this query.

3.4

Given a collection, identify how many indexes exist for that collection.

3.5

Identify the trade-offs of using indexes and the ramifications of deleting indexes
support queries

3.6

Identify the explain plan outputs that signify a potential performance issue, specifically
whether an index is present or not for the given query.

Section 4: DATA MODELING (4%)
4.1

Given a scenario with three collections (a parent and two children) and the user,
identify the embedded relationships and which should be linked.

4.2

Identify data model examples that are considered an anti-pattern.

Section 5: TOOLS AND TOOLING (2%)
5.1

Given a scenario to load Atlas Sample Dataset and then use Data Explorer to use it to
find a given first document in a collection

*Section 6: DRIVERS (18%)
6.1

Define what the XX driver is?

6.2

Define how the XX application connects/uses the XXX driver?

6.3

Define the components of the URI string used by MongoClient to connect the driver to
the database.

6.4

Identify what connection pooling is in terms of the driver and what advantages it offers.

6.5

Identify the correct syntax for the XX driver to insert one document and to insert many
documents.

6.6

Identify the correct syntax for the XX driver to update one document and to update
many documents.

6.7

Identify the correct syntax for the XX driver to delete one document and to delete
many documents.

6.8

Identify the correct syntax for the XX driver to find many documents and to find one
document.

6

6.9

Identify the correct syntax for the XX driver to create an aggregation pipeline.

6.10

Identify the different syntax for the XX driver when using the MongoDB Query
Language (MQL) and when using the Aggregation Framework.

*The MongoDB Associate Developer exam is offered in multiple programming
languages. Although they all share a common set of core questions, Section 6 - Drivers,
will be presented according to the programming language selected during registration.

Maintaining Certifications
Currently, MongoDB certifications do not expire and are governed by MongoDB product
versioning.

Support
MongoDB Program Support
You can learn more about the testing experience and our program guidelines in the
MongoDB Certification Program Guide. If you need to reach the MongoDB certification
team, send us a ticket and we’ll get back to you ASAP! Submit a support ticket.
ProctorU 24/7 Online Support
If you’re having trouble scheduling an exam or connecting with your proctor, or if you get
disconnected during your exam, please contact our testing provider using one of these
methods:
LiveChat
Submit a request
Phone:
United States and Canada: +1 (855) 772-8678
Canada (French): +1 (888) 900-0005
United Kingdom: +44 (808) 168-1055
Australia: +61 (1800) 841-822 ​
+61 (1800) 957-152
Credly Badging Support
If you're looking for help with a badge you've earned, please visit the Credly Help
Center.

7

