Agent Quality
Authors: Meltem Subasioglu, Turan Bulmus,
and Wafae Bakkali

Agent Quality

Acknowledgements
Content contributors
Hussain Chinoy
Ale Fin
Peter Grabowski
Michelle Liu
Anant Nawalgaria
Kanchana Patlolla
Steven Pecht
Julia Wiesinger

Curators and editors
Anant Nawalgaria
Kanchana Patlolla

Designer
Michael Lanning

November 2025

2

Table of contents
Introduction

6

How to Read This Whitepaper

7

Agent Quality in a Non-Deterministic World

8

Why Agent Quality Demands a New Approach

9

The Paradigm Shift: From Predictable Code to Unpredictable Agents

11

The Pillars of Agent Quality: A Framework for Evaluation

13

Summary & What's Next

15

The Art of Agent Evaluation: Judging the Process
A Strategic Framework: The "Outside-In" Evaluation Hierarchy

16
17

The "Outside-In" View: End-to-End Evaluation (The Black Box)

18

The "Inside-Out" View: Trajectory Evaluation (The Glass Box)

19

The Evaluators: The Who and What of Agent Judgment

21

Automated Metrics

22

The LLM-as-a-Judge Paradigm

23

Agent-as-a-Judge

25

Table of contents
Human-in-the-Loop (HITL) Evaluation

26

User Feedback and Reviewer UI

27

Beyond Performance: Responsible AI (RAI) & Safety Evaluation

28

Summary & What's Next

30

Observability: Seeing Inside the Agent's Mind

31

From Monitoring to True Observability

31

The Kitchen Analogy: Line Cook vs. Gourmet Chef

31

The Three Pillars of Observability

32

Pillar 1: Logging – The Agent's Diary

33

Pillar 2: Tracing – Following the Agent's Footsteps

36

Why Tracing is Indispensable

36

Key Elements of an Agent Trace

37

Pillar 3: Metrics – The Agent's Health Report

38

System Metrics: The Vital Signs

38

Quality Metrics: Judging the Decision-Making

39

Putting It All Together: From Raw Data to Actionable Insights

41

Table of contents
Summary & What's Next
Conclusion: Building Trust in an Autonomous World

43
44

Introduction: From Autonomous Capability to Enterprise Trust

44

The Agent Quality Flywheel: A Synthesis of the Framework

45

Three Core Principles for Building Trustworthy Agents

46

The Future is Agentic - and Reliable

47

References

49

Agent Quality

The future of AI is agentic. Its
success is determined by quality.
Introduction
We are at the dawn of the agentic era. The transition from predictable, instruction-based
tools to autonomous, goal-oriented AI agents presents one of the most profound shifts in
software engineering in decades. While these agents unlock incredible capabilities, their
inherent non-determinism makes them unpredictable and shatters our traditional models of
quality assurance.
This whitepaper serves as a practical guide to this new reality, founded on a simple but
radical principle:

Agent quality is an architectural pillar, not a final testing phase.

November 2025

6

Agent Quality

This guide is built on three core messages:
• The Trajectory is the Truth: We must evolve beyond evaluating just the final output. The
true measure of an agent's quality and safety lies in its entire decision-making process.
• Observability is the Foundation: You cannot judge a process you cannot see. We detail
the "three pillars" of observability - Logging , Tracing , and Metrics - as the essential
technical foundation for capturing the agent's "thought process."
• Evaluation is a Continuous Loop: We synthesize these concepts into the "Agent Quality
Flywheel", an operational playbook for turning this data into actionable insights. This
system uses a hybrid of scalable AI-driven evaluators and indispensable Human-in-theLoop (HITL) judgment to drive relentless improvement.
This whitepaper is for the architects, engineers, and product leaders building this future.
It provides the framework to move from building capable agents to building reliable and
trustworthy ones.

How to Read This Whitepaper
This guide is structured to build from the "why" to the "what" and finally to the "how." Use this
section to navigate to the chapters most relevant to your role.
• For All Readers: Start with Chapter 1: Agent Quality in a Non-Deterministic World.
This chapter establishes the core problem. It explains why traditional QA fails for AI agents
and introduces the Four Pillars of Agent Quality (Effectiveness, Efficiency, Robustness,
and Safety) that define our goals.

November 2025

7

Agent Quality

• For Product Managers, Data Scientists, and QA Leaders: If you're responsible for what
to measure and how to judge quality, focus on Chapter 2: The Art of Agent Evaluation.
This chapter is your strategic guide. It details the "Outside-In" hierarchy for evaluation,
explains the scalable "LLM-as-a-Judge" paradigm , and clarifies the critical role of
Human-in-the-Loop (HITL) evaluation.
• For Engineers, Architects, and SREs: If you build the systems, your technical blueprint is
Chapter 3: Observability. This chapter moves from theory to implementation. It provides
the "kitchen analogy" (Line Cook vs. Gourmet Chef) to explain monitoring vs. observability
and details the Three Pillars of Observability: Logs, Traces, and Metrics - the tools
you need to build an "evaluatable" agent.
• For Team Leads and Strategists: To understand how these pieces create a selfimproving system, read Chapter 4: Conclusion. This chapter unites the concepts
into an operational playbook. It introduces the "Agent Quality Flywheel" as a model
for continuous improvement and summarizes the three core principles for building
trustworthy AI.

Agent Quality in a
Non-Deterministic World
The world of artificial intelligence is transforming at full speed. We are moving from building
predictable tools that execute instructions to designing autonomous agents that interpret
intent, formulate plans, and execute complex, multi-step actions. For data scientists and
engineers who build, compete, and deploy at the cutting edge, this transition presents
a profound challenge. The very mechanisms that make AI agents powerful also make
them unpredictable.

November 2025

8

Agent Quality

To understand this shift, compare traditional software to a delivery truck and an AI agent
to a Formula 1 race car. The truck requires only basic checks (“Did the engine start? Did it
follow the fixed route?“). The race car, like an AI agent, is a complex, autonomous system
whose success depends on dynamic judgment. Its evaluation cannot be a simple checklist; it
requires continuous telemetry to judge the quality of every decision—from fuel consumption
to braking strategy.
This evolution is fundamentally changing how we must approach software quality. Traditional
quality assurance (QA) practices, while robust for deterministic systems, are insufficient for
the nuanced and emergent behaviors of modern AI. An agent can pass 100 unit tests and
still fail catastrophically in production because its failure isn't a bug in the code; it's a flaw in
its judgment.
Traditional software verification asks: “Did we build the product right?” It verifies logic
against a fixed specification. Modern AI evaluation must ask a far more complex question:
“Did we build the right product?” This is a process of validation, assessing quality,
robustness, and trustworthiness in a dynamic and uncertain world.
This chapter inspects this new paradigm. We will explore why agent quality demands a new
approach, analyze the technical shift that makes our old methods obsolete, and establish the
strategic "Outside-In" framework for evaluating systems that "think”.

Why Agent Quality Demands a New Approach
For an engineer, risk is something to be identified and mitigated. In traditional software,
failure is explicit: a system crashes, throws a NullPointerException, or returns an
explicitly incorrect calculation. These failures are obvious, deterministic, and traceable to a
specific error in logic.

November 2025

9

Agent Quality

AI agents fail differently. Their failures are often not system crashes but subtle degradations
of quality, emerging from the complex interplay of model weights, training data, and
environmental interactions. These failures are insidious: the system continues to run, API
calls return 200 OK, and the output looks plausible. But it is profoundly wrong, operationally
dangerous, and silently eroding trust.
Organizations that fail to grasp this shift face significant failures, operational inefficiencies,
and reputational damage. While failure modes like algorithmic bias and concept drift existed
in passive models, the autonomy and complexity of agents compound these risks, making
them harder to trace and mitigate. Consider these real-world failure modes highlighted in
Table 1:
Failure Mode

Description

Examples

Algorithmic Bias An agent operationalizes and potentially
amplifies systemic biases present in
its training data, leading to unfair or
discriminatory outcomes.

• A financial agent tasked with risk
summarization over-penalizes loan
applications based on zip codes found in
biased training data.

Factual
Hallucination

The agent produces plausible-sounding
but factually incorrect or invented
information with high confidence, often
when it cannot find a valid source.

• A research tool generating a highly
specific but utterly false historical date
or geographical location in a scholarly
report, undermining academic integrity.

Performance &
Concept Drift

The agent's performance degrades over
time as the real-world data it interacts
with ("concept") changes, making its
original training obsolete.

• A fraud detection agent failing to spot
new attack patterns.

Emergent
Unintended
Behaviors

The agent develops novel or
unanticipated strategies to achieve its
goal, which can be inefficient, unhelpful,
or exploitative.

• Finding and exploiting loopholes in a
system's rules.
• Engaging in "proxy wars" with other bots
(e.g., repeatedly overwriting edits).

Table 1: Agent Failure Modes

November 2025

10

Agent Quality

These failures render traditional debugging and testing paradigms ineffective. You cannot
use a breakpoint to debug a hallucination. You cannot write a unit test to prevent emergent
bias. Root cause analysis requires deep data analysis, model retraining, and systemic
evaluation - a new discipline entirely.

The Paradigm Shift: From Predictable Code to
Unpredictable Agents
The core technical challenge stems from the evolution from model-centric AI to systemcentric AI. Evaluating an AI agent is fundamentally different from evaluating an algorithm
because the agent is a system. This evolution has occurred in compounding stages, each
adding a new layer of evaluative complexity.

Figure 1: From Traditional ML to Multi-Agent Systems

1. Traditional Machine Learning: Evaluating regression or classification models, while nontrivial, is a well-defined problem. We rely on statistical metrics like Precision, Recall, F1Score, and RMSE against a held-out test set. The problem is complex, but the definition of
"correct" is clear.

November 2025

11

Agent Quality

2. The Passive LLM: With the rise of generative models, we lost our simple metrics. How
do we measure the "accuracy" of a generated paragraph? The output is probabilistic.
Even with identical inputs, the output can vary. Evaluation became more complex, relying
on human raters and model-vs-model benchmarking. Still, these systems were largely
passive, text-in, text-out tools.
3. LLM+RAG (Retrieval-Augmented Generation): The next leap introduced a multicomponent pipeline, as pioneered by Lewis et al. (2020)1 in their work "RetrievalAugmented Generation for Knowledge-Intensive NLP Tasks." Now, failure could occur
in the LLM or in the retrieval system. Did the agent give a bad answer because the LLM
reasoned poorly, or because the vector database retrieved irrelevant snippets? Our
evaluation surface expanded from just the model to include the performance of chunking
strategies, embeddings, and retrievers.
4. The Active AI Agent: Today, we face a profound architectural shift. The LLM is no longer
just a text generator; it is the reasoning "brain" within a complex system, integrated into a
loop capable of autonomous action. This agentic system introduces three core technical
capabilities that break our evaluation models:
• Planning and Multi-Step Reasoning: Agents decompose complex goals ("plan
my trip") into multiple sub-tasks. This creates a trajectory (Thought → Action →
Observation → Thought...). The non-determinism of the LLM now compounds at every
step. A small, stochastic word choice in Step 1 can send the agent down a completely
different and unrecoverable reasoning path by Step 4.
• Tool Use and Function Calling: Agents interact with the real world through APIs
and external tools (code interpreters, search engines, booking APIs). This introduces
dynamic environmental interaction. The agent's next action depends entirely on the
state of an external, uncontrollable world.

November 2025

12

Agent Quality

• Memory: Agents maintain state. Short-term "scratchpad" memory tracks the current
task, while long-term memory allows the agent to learn from past interactions. This
means the agent's behavior evolves, and an input that worked yesterday might produce
a different result today based on what the agent has "learned."
5. Multi-Agent Systems: The ultimate architectural complexity arises when multiple
active agents are integrated into a shared environment. This is no longer the evaluation
of a single trajectory but of a system-level emergent phenomenon, introducing new,
fundamental challenges:
• Emergent System Failures: The system's success depends on the unscripted
interactions between agents, such as resource contention, communication bottlenecks,
and systemic deadlocks, which cannot be attributed to a single agent's failure.
• Cooperative vs. Competitive Evaluation: The objective function itself may become
ambiguous. In cooperative MAS (e.g., supply chain optimization), success is a global
metric, while in competitive MAS (e.g., game theory scenarios or auction systems), the
evaluation often requires tracking individual agent performance and the stability of the
overall market/environment.

This combination of capabilities means the primary unit of evaluation is no longer the model,
but the entire system trajectory. The agent's emergent behavior arises from the intricate
interplay between its planning module, its tools, its memory, and the dynamic environment.

The Pillars of Agent Quality: A Framework for Evaluation
If we can no longer rely on simple accuracy metrics, and we must evaluate the entire system,
where do we begin? The answer is a strategic shift known as the "Outside-In" approach.

November 2025

13

Agent Quality

This approach anchors AI evaluation in user-centric metrics and overarching business goals,
moving beyond a sole reliance on internal, component-level technical scores. We must
stop asking only "What is the model's F1-score?" and start asking, "Does this agent deliver
measurable value and align with our user's intent?"
This strategy requires a holistic framework that connects high-level business goals to
technical performance. We define agent quality across four interconnected pillars:

Figure 2: The four pillars of Agent Quality

Effectiveness (Goal Achievement): This is the ultimate "black-box" question: Did the agent
successfully and accurately achieve the user's actual intent? This pillar connects directly
to user-centered metrics and business KPIs. For a retail agent, this isn't just "did it find a
product?" but "did it drive a conversion?" For a data analysis agent, it's not "did it write
code?" but "did the code produce the correct insight?" Effectiveness is the final measure of
task success.
Efficiency (Operational Cost): Did the agent solve the problem well? An agent that takes
25 steps, five failed tool calls, and three self-correction loops to book a simple flight can be
considered as a low-quality agent - even if it eventually succeeds. Efficiency is measured in
resources consumed: total tokens (cost), wall-clock time (latency), and trajectory complexity
(total number of steps).

November 2025

14

Agent Quality

Robustness (Reliability): How does the agent handle adversity and the messiness of the
real world? When an API times out, a website's layout changes, data is missing, or a user
provides an ambiguous prompt, does the agent fail gracefully? A robust agent retries failed
calls, asks the user for clarification when needed, and reports what it couldn't do and why
rather than crashing or hallucinating.
Safety & Alignment (Trustworthiness): This is the non-negotiable gate. Does the agent
operate within its defined ethical boundaries and constraints? This pillar encompasses
everything from Responsible AI metrics for fairness and bias to security against prompt
injection and data leakage. It ensures the agent stays on task, refuses harmful instructions,
and operates as a trustworthy proxy for your organization.
This framework makes one thing clear: you cannot measure any of these pillars if you only
see the final answer. You cannot measure Efficiency if you don't count the steps. You cannot
diagnose a Robustness failure if you don't know which API call failed. You cannot verify
Safety if you cannot inspect the agent's internal reasoning.
A holistic framework for agent quality demands a holistic architecture for agent visibility.

Summary & What's Next
The intrinsic non-deterministic nature of agents has broken traditional quality assurance.
Risks now include subtle issues like bias, hallucination, and drift, driven by a shift from passive
models to active, system-centric agents that plan and use tools. We must change our focus
from verification (checking specs) to validation (judging value).

November 2025

15

Agent Quality

This requires an "Outside-In" framework measuring agent quality across four pillars:
Effectiveness, Efficiency, Robustness, and Safety. Measuring these pillars demands deep
visibility—seeing inside the agent's decision-making trajectory.
Before building the how (observability architecture), we must define the what: What does
good evaluation look like?
Chapter 2 will define the strategies and judges for assessing complex agent behavior.
Chapter 3 will then build the technical foundation (logging, tracing, and metrics) needed
to capture the data.

The Art of Agent Evaluation: Judging
the Process
In Chapter 1, we established the fundamental shift from traditional software testing to
modern AI evaluation. Traditional testing is a deterministic process of verification - it asks,
“Did we build the product right?” against a fixed specification. This approach fails when a
system’s core logic is probabilistic, because non-deterministic output may be more likely to
introduce subtle degradations of quality that do not result in explicit crashes and may not
be repeatable.
Agent evaluation, by contrast, is a holistic process of validation. It asks a far more complex
and essential strategic question: “Did we build the right product?” This question is the
strategic anchor for the "Outside-In" evaluation framework, representing the necessary
shift from internal compliance to judging the system's external value and alignment with user
intent. This requires us to assess the overall quality, robustness, and user value of an agent
operating in a dynamic world.

November 2025

16

Agent Quality

The rise of AI agents, which can plan, use tools, and interact with complex environments,
significantly complicates this evaluation landscape. We must move beyond "testing" an
output and learn the art of "evaluating" a process. This chapter provides the strategic
framework for doing just that: judging the agent’s entire decision-making trajectory, from
initial intent to final outcome.

A Strategic Framework: The "Outside-In"
Evaluation Hierarchy
To avoid getting lost in a sea of component-level metrics, evaluation must be a top-down,
strategic process. We call this the "Outside-In" Hierarchy. This approach prioritizes the only
metric that ultimately matters - real-world success - before diving into the technical details
of why that success did or did not occur. This model is a two-stage process: start with the
black box, then open it up.

November 2025

17

Agent Quality

The "Outside-In" View: End-to-End Evaluation (The Black Box)

Figure 3: A Framework for Holistic Agent Evaluation

The first and most important question is: "Did the agent achieve the user's
goal effectively?"
This is the "Outside-In" view. Before analyzing a single internal thought or tool call, we must
evaluate the agent's final performance against its defined objective.
Metrics at this stage focus on overall task completion. We measure:
• Task Success Rate: A binary (or graded) score of whether the final output was correct,
complete, and solved the user's actual problem, e.g. PR acceptance rate for a coding
agent, successful database transaction rate for a financial agent, or session completion
rate for a customer service bot.

November 2025

18

Agent Quality

• User Satisfaction: For interactive agents, this can be a direct user feedback score (e.g.,
thumbs up/down) or a Customer Satisfaction Score (CSAT).
• Overall Quality: If the agent's goal was quantitative (e.g., "summarize these 10 articles"),
the metric might be accuracy or completeness (e.g., "Did it summarize all 10?").
If the agent scores 100% at this stage, our work may be done. But in a complex system,
it rarely will. When the agent produces a flawed final output, abandons a task, or fails to
converge on a solution, the "Outside-In" view tells us what went wrong. Now we must open
the box to see why.

Applied Tip:
To build an output regression test with the Agent Development Kit (ADK), start
the ADK web UI (adk web) and interact with your agent. When you receive an ideal
response that you want to set as the benchmark, navigate to the Eval tab and click
"Add current session." This saves the entire interaction as an Eval Case (in a .test.
json file) and locks in the agent's current text as the ground truth final_response.
You can then run this Eval Set via the CLI (adk eval) or pytest to automatically
check future agent versions against this saved answer, catching any regressions in
output quality.

The "Inside-Out" View: Trajectory Evaluation (The Glass Box)
Once a failure is identified, we move to the "Inside-Out" view. We analyze the agent's
approach by systematically assessing every component of its execution trajectory:

November 2025

19

Agent Quality

1. LLM Planning (The "Thought"): We first check the core reasoning. Is the LLM itself the
problem? Failures here include hallucinations, nonsensical or off-topic responses, context
pollution, or repetitive output loops.
2. Tool Usage (Selection & Parameterization): An agent is only as good as its tools.
We must analyze if the agent is calling the wrong tool, failing to call a necessary tool,
hallucinating tool names or parameter names/types, or calling one unnecessarily. Even if it
selects the right tool, it can fail by providing missing parameters, incorrect data types, or
malformed JSON for the API call.
3. Tool Response Interpretation (The "Observation"): After a tool executes correctly, the
agent must understand the result. Agents frequently fail here by misinterpreting numerical
data, failing to extract key entities from the response, or, critically, not recognizing an
error state returned by the tool (e.g., an API's 404 error) and proceeding as if the call
was successful.
4. RAG Performance: If the agent uses Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG), the
trajectory depends on the quality of its retrieved information. Failures include irrelevant
document retrieval, fetching outdated or incorrect information, or the LLM ignoring the
retrieved context entirely and hallucinating an answer anyway.
5. Trajectory Efficiency and Robustness: Beyond correctness, we must evaluate the
process itself: exposing inefficient resource allocation, such as an excessive number of
API calls, high latency, or redundant efforts. It also reveals robustness failures, such as
unhandled exceptions.
6. Multi-Agent Dynamics: In advanced systems, trajectories involve multiple agents.
Evaluation must then also include inter-agent communication logs to check for
misunderstandings or communication loops and ensure agents are adhering to their
defined roles without conflicting with others.

November 2025

20

Agent Quality

By analyzing the trace, we can move from "the final answer is wrong" (Black Box) to "the final
answer is wrong because …." (Glass Box). This level of diagnostic power is the entire goal of
agent evaluation.

Applied Tip:
When you save an Eval Case (as described in the previous tip) in the ADK, it
also saves the entire sequence of tool calls as the ground truth trajectory. Your
automated pytest or adk eval run will then check this trajectory for a perfect match
(by default).
To manually implement process evaluation (i.e., debug a failure), use the Trace
tab in the adk web UI. This provides an interactive graph of the agent's execution,
allowing you to visually inspect the agent’s plan, see every tool it called with its exact
arguments, and compare its actual path against the expected path to pinpoint the
exact step where its logic failed.

The Evaluators: The Who and What of Agent Judgment
Knowing what to evaluate (the trajectory) is half the battle. The other half is how to judge
it. For nuanced aspects like quality, safety, and interpretability, this judgment requires a
sophisticated, hybrid approach. Automated systems provide scale, but human judgment
remains the crucial arbiter of quality.

November 2025

21

Agent Quality

Automated Metrics
Automated metrics provide speed and reproducibility. They are useful for regression testing
and benchmarking outputs. Examples include:
• String-based similarity (ROUGE, BLEU), comparing generated text to references.
• Embedding-based similarity (BERTScore, cosine similarity), measuring
semantic closeness.
• Task-specific benchmarks, e.g., TruthfulQA 2
Metrics are efficient but shallow: they capture surface similarity, not deeper reasoning or
user value.
Applied Tip:
Implement automated metrics as the first quality gate in your CI/CD pipeline. The key
is to treat them as trend indicators, not as absolute measures of quality. A specific
BERTScore of 0.8, for example, doesn't definitively mean the answer is "good."
Their real value is in tracking changes: if your main branch consistently averages a
0.8 BERTScore on your "golden set," and a new code commit drops that average to
0.6, you have automatically detected a significant regression. This makes metrics the
perfect, low-cost "first filter" to catch obvious failures at scale before escalating to
more expensive LLM-as-a-Judge or human evaluation.

November 2025

22

Agent Quality

The LLM-as-a-Judge Paradigm
How can we automate the evaluation of qualitative outputs like "is this summary good?" or
"was this plan logical?" The answer is to use the same technology we are trying to evaluate.
The LLM-as-a-Judge3 paradigm involves using a powerful, state-of-the-art model (like
Google's Gemini Advanced) to evaluate the outputs of another agent.
We provide the "judge" LLM with the agent's output, the original prompt, the "golden" answer
or reference (if one exists), and a detailed evaluation rubric (e.g., "Rate the helpfulness,
correctness, and safety of this response on a scale of 1-5, explaining your reasoning.").
This approach provides scalable, fast, and surprisingly nuanced feedback, especially for
intermediate steps like the quality of an agent's "Thought" or its interpretation of a tool
response. While it doesn't replace human judgment, it allows data science teams to rapidly
evaluate performance across thousands of scenarios, making an iterative evaluation
process feasible.

November 2025

23

Agent Quality

Applied Tip:
To implement this, prioritize pairwise comparison over single-scoring to mitigate the
exact biases mentioned. First, run your evaluation set of prompts against two different
agent versions (e.g., your old production agent vs. your new experimental one) to
generate an "Answer A" and "Answer B" for each prompt.
Then, create the LLM judge by giving a powerful LLM (like Gemini Pro) a clear rubric
and a prompt that forces a choice: "Given this User Query, which response is more
helpful: A or B? Explain your reasoning." By automating this process, you can scalably
calculate a win/loss/tie rate for your new agent. A high "win rate" is a far more reliable
signal of improvement than a small change in an absolute (and often noisy) 1-5 score.
A prompt for an LLM-as-a-Judge, especially for the robust pairwise comparison,
might look like this:
You are an expert evaluator for a customer support chatbot. Your goal is to
assess which of two responses is more helpful, polite, and correct.
[User Query]
"Hi, my order #12345 hasn't arrived yet."
[Answer A]
"I can see that order #12345 is currently out for delivery and should
arrive by 5 PM today."
[Answer B]
"Order #12345 is on the truck. It will be there by 5."
Please evaluate which answer is better. Compare them on correctness,
helpfulness, and tone. Provide your reasoning and then output your final
decision in a JSON object with a "winner" key (either "A", "B", or "tie")
and a "rationale" key.

November 2025

24

Agent Quality

Agent-as-a-Judge
While LLMs can score final responses, agents require deeper evaluation of their reasoning
and actions. The emerging Agent-as-a-Judge4 paradigm uses one agent to evaluate the full
execution trace of another. Instead of scoring only outputs, it assesses the process itself. Key
evaluation dimensions include:
• Plan quality: Was the plan logically structured and feasible?
• Tool use: Were the right tools chosen and applied correctly?
• Context handling: Did the agent use prior information effectively?
This approach is particularly valuable for process evaluation, where failures often arise from
flawed intermediate steps rather than the final output.

Applied Tip:
To implement an Agent-as-a-Judge, consider feeding relevant parts of the execution
trace object to your judge. First, configure your agent framework to log and
export the trace, including the internal plan, the list of tools chosen, and the exact
arguments passed.
Then, create a specialized "Critic Agent" with a prompt (rubric) that asks it to evaluate
this trace object directly. Your prompt should ask specific process questions: "1. Based
on the trace, was the initial plan logical? 2. Was the {tool_A} tool the correct first
choice, or should another tool have been used? 3. Were the arguments correct and
properly formatted?" This allows you to automatically detect process failures (like an
inefficient plan), even when the agent produced a final answer that looked correct.

November 2025

25

Agent Quality

Human-in-the-Loop (HITL) Evaluation
While automation provides scale, it struggles with deep subjectivity and complex domain
knowledge. Human-in-the-Loop (HITL) evaluation is the essential process for capturing the
critical qualitative signals and nuanced judgments that automated systems miss.
We must, however, move away from the idea that human rating provides a perfect "objective
ground truth." For highly subjective tasks (like assessing creative quality or nuanced tone),
perfect inter-annotator agreement is rare. Instead, HITL is the indispensable methodology
for establishing a human-calibrated benchmark, ensuring the agent's behavior aligns with
complex human values, contextual needs, and domain-specific accuracy.
The HITL process involves several key functions:
• Domain Expertise: For specialized agents (e.g., medical, legal, or financial), you must
leverage domain experts to evaluate factual correctness and adherence to specific
industry standards.
• Interpreting Nuance: Humans are essential for judging the subtle qualities that
define a high-quality interaction, such as tone, creativity, user intent, and complex
ethical alignment.
• Creating the "Golden Set": Before automation can be effective, humans must establish
the "gold standard" benchmark. This involves curating a comprehensive evaluation set,
defining the objectives for success , and crafting a robust suite of test cases that cover
typical, edge, and adversarial scenarios.

November 2025

26

Agent Quality

Applied Tip:
For runtime safety, implement an interruption workflow. In a framework like ADK, you
can configure the agent to pause its execution before committing to a high-stakes
tool call (like execute_payment or delete_database_entry). The agent’s state
and planned action are then surfaced in a Reviewer UI, where a human operator must
manually approve or reject the step before the agent is allowed to resume.

User Feedback and Reviewer UI
Evaluation must also capture real-world user feedback. Every interaction is a signal of
usefulness, clarity, and trust. This feedback includes both qualitative signals (like thumbs up/
down) and quantitative in-product success metrics, such as pull request (PR) acceptance
rate for a coding agent, or successful booking completion rate for a travel agent. Best
practices include:
• Low-friction feedback: thumbs up/down, quick sliders, or short comments.
• Context-rich review: feedback should be paired with the full conversation and agent’s
reasoning trace.
• Reviewer User Interface (UI): a two-panel interface: conversation on the left, reasoning
steps on the right, with inline tagging for issues like “bad plan” or “tool misuse.”
• Governance dashboards: aggregate feedback to highlight recurring issues and risks.
Without usable interfaces, evaluation frameworks fail in practice. A strong UI makes user and
reviewer feedback visible, fast, and actionable.

November 2025

27

Agent Quality

Applied Tip:
Implement your user feedback system as an event-driven pipeline, not just a static
log. When a user clicks "thumbs down," that signal must automatically capture the full,
context-rich conversation trace and add it to a dedicated review queue within your
developer's Reviewer UI.

Beyond Performance: Responsible AI (RAI) &
Safety Evaluation
A final dimension of evaluation operates not as a component, but as a mandatory, nonnegotiable gate for any production agent: Responsible AI and Safety. An agent that is 100%
effective but causes harm is a total failure.
Evaluation for safety is a specialized discipline that must be woven into the entire
development lifecycle. This involves:
• Systematic Red Teaming: Actively trying to break the agent using adversarial scenarios.
This includes attempts to generate hate speech, reveal private information, propagate
harmful stereotypes, or induce the agent to engage in malicious actions.
• Automated Filters & Human Review: Implementing technical filters to catch policy
violations and coupling them with human review, as automation alone may not catch
nuanced forms of bias or toxicity.

November 2025

28

Agent Quality

• Adherence to Guidelines: Explicitly evaluating the agent’s outputs against
predefined ethical guidelines and principles to ensure alignment and prevent
unintended consequences.
Ultimately, performance metrics tell us if the agent can do the job, but safety evaluation tells
us if it should.

Applied Tip:
Implement your guardrails as a structured Plugin, rather than as isolated functions.
In this pattern, the callback is the mechanism (the hook provided by ADK), while the
Plugin is the reusable module you build.
For example, you can build a single SafetyPlugin class. This plugin would then
register its internal methods with the framework's available callbacks:

1. Your plugin's check_input_safety() method would register with the
before_model_callback. This method's job is to run your prompt
injection classifier.
2. Your plugin's check_output_pii() method would register with the after_
model_callback. This method's job is to run your PII scanner.
This plugin architecture makes your guardrails reusable, independently testable, and
cleanly layered on top of the foundation model's built-in safety settings (like those
in Gemini).

November 2025

29

Agent Quality

Summary & What's Next
Effective agent evaluation requires moving beyond simple testing to a strategic, hierarchical
framework. This "Outside-In" approach first validates end-to-end task completion (the Black
Box) before analyzing the full trajectory within the "Glass Box"—assessing reasoning quality,
tool use, robustness, and efficiency.
Judging this process demands a hybrid approach: scalable automation like LLM-as-a-Judge,
paired with the indispensable, nuanced judgment of Human-in-the-Loop (HITL) evaluators.
This framework is secured by a non-negotiable layer of Responsible AI and safety evaluation
to build trustworthy systems.
We understand the need to judge the entire trajectory, but this framework is purely
theoretical without the data. To enable this "Glass Box" evaluation, the system must first be
observable. Chapter 3 will provide the architectural blueprint, moving from the theory of
evaluation to the practice of observability by mastering the three pillars: logging, tracing,
and metrics.

November 2025

30

Agent Quality

Observability: Seeing Inside the
Agent's Mind
From Monitoring to True Observability
In the last chapter, we established that AI Agents are a new breed of software. They don't
just follow instructions; they make decisions. This fundamental difference demands a new
approach to quality assurance, moving us beyond traditional software monitoring into the
deeper realm of observability.
To grasp the difference, let's leave the server room and step into a kitchen.

The Kitchen Analogy: Line Cook vs. Gourmet Chef
Traditional Software is a Line Cook: Imagine a fast-food kitchen. The line cook has a
laminated recipe card for making a burger. The steps are rigid and deterministic: toast bun
for 30 seconds, grill patty for 90 seconds, add one slice of cheese, two pickles, one squirt
of ketchup.
• Monitoring in this world is a checklist. Is the grill at the right temperature? Did the
cook follow every step? Was the order completed on time? We are verifying a known,
predictable process.

November 2025

31

Agent Quality

An AI Agent is a Gourmet Chef in a "Mystery Box" Challenge: The chef is given a
goal ("Create an amazing dessert") and a basket of ingredients (the user's prompt, data,
and available tools). There is no single correct recipe. They might create a chocolate lava
cake, a deconstructed tiramisu, or a saffron-infused panna cotta. All could be valid, even
brilliant, solutions.
• Observability is how a food critic would judge the chef. The critic doesn't just taste the
final dish. They want to understand the process and the reasoning. Why did the chef
choose to pair raspberries with basil? What technique did they use to crystallize the
ginger? How did they adapt when they realized they were out of sugar? We need to see
inside their "thought process" to truly evaluate the quality of their work.
This represents a fundamental shift for AI agents, moving beyond simple monitoring to
true observability. The focus is no longer on merely verifying if an agent is active, but
on understanding the quality of its cognitive processes. Instead of asking "Is the agent
running?", the critical question becomes "Is the agent thinking effectively?".

The Three Pillars of Observability
So, how do we get access to the agent's "thought process"? We can't read its mind
directly, but we can analyze the evidence it leaves behind. This is achieved by building
our observability practice on three foundational pillars: Logs, Traces, and Metrics. They
are the tools that allow us to move from tasting the final dish to critiquing the entire
culinary performance.

November 2025

32

Agent Quality

Figure 4: Three foundational pillars for Agent Observability

Let’s dissect each pillar and see how they work together to give us a critic's-eye view of our
agent's performance.

Pillar 1: Logging – The Agent's Diary
What are Logs? Logs are the atomic unit of observability. Think of them as timestamped
entries in your agent's diary. Each entry is a raw, immutable fact about a discrete event: "At
10:01:32, I was asked a question. At 10:01:33, I decided to use the get_weather tool." They tell
us what happened.

November 2025

33

Agent Quality

Beyond print(): What Makes a Log Effective?
A fully managed service like Google Cloud Logging allows you to store, search, and analyze
log data at scale. It can automatically collect logs from Google Cloud services, and its Log
Analytics capabilities allow you to run SQL queries to uncover trends in your agent's behavior.
A best-in-class framework makes this easy. For example, the Agent Development Kit (ADK) is
built on Python's standard logging module. This allows a developer to configure the desired
level of detail - from high-level INFO messages in production to granular DEBUG messages
during development - without changing the agent's code.
The Anatomy of a Critical Log Entry
To reconstruct an agent's "thought process," a log must be rich with context. A structured
JSON format is the gold standard.
• Core Information: A good log captures the full context: prompt/response pairs,
intermediate reasoning steps (the agent's "chain of thought", a concept explored by Wei
et al. (2022)), structured tool calls (inputs, outputs, errors), and any changes to the agent's
internal state.
• The Tradeoff: Verbosity vs. Performance: A highly detailed DEBUG log is a developer's
best friend for troubleshooting but can be too "noisy" and create performance overhead
in a production environment. This is why structured logging is so powerful; it allows you to
collect detailed data but filter it efficiently.
Here’s a practical example showing the power of a structured log, adapted from an ADK
DEBUG output:

November 2025

34

Agent Quality

JSON
// A structured log entry capturing a single LLM request
...
2025-07-10 15:26:13,778 - DEBUG - google_adk.google.adk.models.google_llm - Sending out
request, model: gemini-2.0-flash, backend: GoogleLLMVariant.GEMINI_API, stream: False
2025-07-10 15:26:13,778 - DEBUG - google_adk.google.adk.models.google_llm LLM Request:
----------------------------------------------------------System Instruction:
You roll dice and answer questions about the outcome of the dice rolls.....
The description about you is "hello world agent that can roll a dice of 8 sides and check
prime numbers."
----------------------------------------------------------Contents:
{"parts":[{"text":"Roll a 6 sided dice"}],"role":"user"}
{"parts":[{"function_call":{"args":{"sides":6},"name":"roll_die"}}],"role":"model"}
{"parts":[{"function_response":{"name":"roll_die","response":{"result":2}}}],"role":"user"}
----------------------------------------------------------Functions:
roll_die: {'sides': {'type': <Type.INTEGER: 'INTEGER'>}}
check_prime: {'nums': {'items': {'type': <Type.INTEGER: 'INTEGER'>}, 'type': <Type.ARRAY:
'ARRAY'>}}
----------------------------------------------------------2025-07-10 15:26:13,779 - INFO - google_genai.models - AFC is enabled with max remote
calls: 10.
2025-07-10 15:26:14,309 - INFO - google_adk.google.adk.models.google_llm LLM Response:
----------------------------------------------------------Text:
I have rolled a 6 sided die, and the result is 2.
...

Snippet 1: A structured log entry capturing a single LLM request

Applied Tip:
A powerful logging pattern is to record the agent's intent before an action and the
outcome after. This immediately clarifies the difference between a failed attempt and a
deliberate decision not to act.

November 2025

35

Agent Quality

Pillar 2: Tracing – Following the Agent's Footsteps
What is Tracing? If logs are diary entries, traces are the narrative thread that connects
them into a coherent story. Tracing follows a single task - from the initial user query to the
final answer - stitching together individual logs (called spans) into a complete, end-to-end
view. Traces reveal the crucial "why" by showing the causal relationship between events.
Imagine a detective's corkboard. Logs are the individual clues - a photo, a ticket stub. A trace
is the red yarn connecting them, revealing the full sequence of events.

Why Tracing is Indispensable
Consider a complex agent failure where a user asks a question and gets a
nonsensical answer.
• Isolated Logs might show: ERROR: RAG search failed and ERROR: LLM response
failed validation. You see the errors, but the root cause is unclear.
• A Trace reveals the full causal chain: User Query → RAG Search (failed) →
Faulty Tool Call (received null input) → LLM Error (confused by bad
tool output) → Incorrect Final Answer
The trace makes the root cause instantly obvious, making it indispensable for debugging
complex, multi-step agent behaviors.

November 2025

36

Agent Quality

Key Elements of an Agent Trace
Modern tracing is built on open standards like OpenTelemetry. The core components are:
• Spans: The individual, named operations within a trace (e.g., an llm_call span, a
tool_execution span).
• Attributes: The rich metadata attached to each span - prompt_id, latency_ms,
token_count, user_id, etc.
• Context Propagation: The "magic" that links spans together via a unique trace_id,
allowing backends like Google Cloud Trace to assemble the full picture. Cloud Trace is a
distributed tracing system that helps you understand how long it takes for your application
to handle requests. When an agent is deployed on a managed runtime like Vertex AI Agent
Engine, this integration is streamlined. The Agent Engine handles the infrastructure for
scaling agents in production and automatically integrates with Cloud Trace to provide endto-end observability, linking the agent invocation with all subsequent model and tool calls.

Figure 5: OpenTelemetry view lets you inspect attributes, logs, events, and other details

November 2025

37

Agent Quality

Pillar 3: Metrics – The Agent's Health Report
What are Metrics? If logs are the chef's prep notes and traces are the critic watching the
recipe unfold step-by-step, then metrics are the final scorecard the critic publishes. They
are the quantitative, aggregated health scores that give you an immediate, at-a-glance
understanding of your agent's overall performance.
Crucially, a food critic doesn't just invent these scores based on a single taste of the final
dish. Their judgment is informed by everything they observe. Metrics are the same: they are
not a new source of data. They are derived by aggregating the data from your logs and
traces over time. They answer the question, "How well did the performance go, on average?"
For AI Agents, it's useful to divide metrics into two distinct categories: the directly
measurable System Metrics and the more complex, evaluative Quality Metrics.

System Metrics: The Vital Signs
System Metrics are the foundational, quantitative measures of operational health. They
are directly calculated from the attributes on your logs and traces through aggregation
functions (like average, sum, or percentile). Think of these as the agent's vital signs: its pulse,
temperature, and blood pressure.
Key System Metrics to track include:
• Performance:
• Latency (P50/P99): Calculated by aggregating the duration_ms attribute from traces
to find the median and 99th percentile response times. This tells you about the typical
and worst-case user experience.

November 2025

38

Agent Quality

• Error Rate: The percentage of traces that contain a span with an error=true attribute.
• Cost:
• Tokens per Task: The average of the token_count attribute across all traces, which is
vital for managing LLM costs.
• API Cost per Run: By combining token counts with model pricing, you can track the
average financial cost per task.
• Effectiveness:
• Task Completion Rate: The percentage of traces that successfully reach a designated
"success" span.
• Tool Usage Frequency: A count of how often each tool (e.g., get_weather) appears as
a span name, revealing which tools are most valuable.

These metrics are essential for operations, setting alerts, and managing the cost and
performance of your agent fleet.

Quality Metrics: Judging the Decision-Making
Quality Metrics are second-order metrics derived by applying the judgment frameworks
detailed in Chapter 2 on top of the raw observability data. They move beyond efficiency to
assess the agent's reasoning and final output quality itself.

November 2025

39

Agent Quality

These are not simple counters or averages. They are second-order metrics derived by
applying a judgment layer on top of the raw observability data. They assess the quality of the
agent's reasoning and final output.
Examples of critical Quality Metrics include:
• Correctness & Accuracy: Did the agent provide a factually correct answer? If it
summarized a document, was the summary faithful to the source?
• Trajectory Adherence: Did the agent follow the intended path or "ideal recipe" for a
given task? Did it call the right tools in the right order?
• Safety & Responsibility: Did the agent's response avoid harmful, biased, or
inappropriate content?
• Helpfulness & Relevance: Was the agent's final response actually helpful to the user and
relevant to their query?
Generating these metrics requires more than a simple database query. It often involves
comparing the agent's output against a "golden" dataset or using a sophisticated LLM-as-aJudge to score the response against a rubric.
The observability data from our logs and traces is the essential evidence needed to calculate
these scores, but the process of judgment itself is a separate, critical discipline.

November 2025

40

Agent Quality

Putting It All Together: From Raw Data to Actionable Insights
Having logs, traces, and metrics is like having a talented chef, a well-stocked pantry, and a
judging rubric. But these are just the components. To run a successful restaurant, you need
to assemble them into a working system for a busy dinner service. This section is about that
practical assembly - turning your observability data into real-time actions and insights during
live operations.
This involves three key operational practices:
1. Dashboards & Alerting: Separating System Health from Model Quality
A single dashboard is not enough. To effectively manage an AI agent, you need distinct
views for your System Metrics and your Quality Metrics, as they serve different purposes
and different teams.
• Operational Dashboards (for System Metrics): This dashboard category focuses
on real-time operational health. It tracks the agent's core vital signs and is primarily
intended for Site Reliability Engineers (SREs), DevOps, and operations teams
responsible for system uptime and performance.
• What it tracks: P99 Latency, Error Rates, API Costs, Token Consumption.
• Purpose: To immediately spot system failures, performance degradation, or
budget overruns.
• Example Alert: ALERT: P99 latency > 3s for 5 minutes. This indicates a
system bottleneck that requires immediate engineering attention.
• Quality Dashboards (for Quality Metrics): This category tracks the more nuanced,
slower-moving indicators of agent effectiveness and correctness. It is essential for
product owners, data scientists, and AgentOps teams who are responsible for the
quality of the agent's decisions and outputs.

November 2025

41

Agent Quality

• What it tracks: Factual Correctness Score, Trajectory Adherence, Helpfulness
Ratings, Hallucination Rate.
• Purpose: To detect subtle drifts in agent quality, especially after a new model or
prompt is deployed.
• Example Alert: ALERT: 'Helpfulness Score' has dropped by 10% over
the last 24 hours. This signals that while the system may be running fine
(System Metrics are OK), the quality of the agent's output is degrading, requiring an
investigation into its logic or data.
2. Security & PII: Protecting Your Data
This is a non-negotiable aspect of production operations. User inputs captured in logs
and traces often contain Personally Identifiable Information (PII). A robust PII scrubbing
mechanism must be an integrated part of your logging pipeline before data is stored longterm to ensure compliance with privacy regulations and protect your users.
3. The Core Trade-off: Granularity vs. Overhead
Capturing highly detailed logs and traces for every single request in production
can be prohibitively expensive and add latency to your system. The key is to find a
strategic balance.
• Best Practice - Dynamic Sampling: Use high-granularity logging (DEBUG level) in
development environments. In production, set a lower default log level (INFO) but
implement dynamic sampling. For example, you might decide to trace only 10% of
successful requests but 100% of all errors. This gives you broad performance data for
your metrics without overwhelming your system, while still capturing the rich diagnostic
detail you need to debug every failure.

November 2025

42

Agent Quality

Summary & What's Next
To trust an autonomous agent, you must first be able to understand its process. You wouldn't
judge a gourmet chef's final dish without having some insight into their recipe, technique,
and decision-making along the way. This chapter has established that Observability is the
framework that gives us this crucial insight into our agents. It provides the "eyes and ears"
inside the kitchen.
We've learned that a robust observability practice is built upon three foundational pillars,
which work together to transform raw data into a complete picture:
• Logs: The structured diary, providing the granular, factual record of what happened at
every step.
• Traces: The narrative story that connects individual logs, showing the causal path to
reveal why it happened.
• Metrics: The aggregated report card, summarizing performance at scale to tell us how
well it happened. We further divided these into vital System Metrics (like latency and
cost) and crucial Quality Metrics (like correctness and helpfulness).
By assembling these pillars into a coherent operational system, we move from flying blind to
having a clear, data-driven view of our agent's behavior, efficiency, and effectiveness.
We now have all the pieces: the why (the problem of non-determinism in Chapter 1), the
what (the evaluation framework in Chapter 2), and the how (the observability architecture in
Chapter 3).
In Chapter 4, we will bring this all together into a single, operational playbook, showing how
these components form the "Agent Quality Flywheel" - a continuous improvement loop to
build agents that are not just capable, but truly trustworthy.

November 2025

43

Agent Quality

Conclusion: Building Trust in an
Autonomous World
Introduction: From Autonomous Capability to
Enterprise Trust
In the opening of this whitepaper, we posed a fundamental challenge: AI agents, with their
non-deterministic and autonomous nature, shatter our traditional models of software quality.
We likened the task of assessing an agent to evaluating a new employee - you don't just ask
if the task was done, you ask how it was done. Was it efficient? Was it safe? Did it create a
good experience? Flying blind is not an option when the consequence is business risk.
The journey since that opening has been about building the blueprint for trust in this new
paradigm. We established the need for a new discipline by defining the Four Pillars of Agent
Quality: Effectiveness, Cost-Efficiency, Safety, and User Trust. We then showed how to
gain "eyes and ears" inside the agent's mind through Observability (Chapter 3) and how
to judge its performance with a holistic Evaluation framework (Chapter 2). This paper has
laid the foundation for what to measure and how to see it. The critical next step, covered
in the subsequent whitepaper, "Day 5: Prototype to Production" is to operationalize
these principles. This involves taking an evaluated agent and successfully running it in
a production environment through robust CI/CD pipelines, safe rollout strategies, and
scalable infrastructure.
Now, we bring it all together. This isn't just a summary; it's the operational playbook for
turning abstract principles into a reliable, self-improving system, bridging the gap between
evaluation and production.

November 2025

44

Agent Quality

The Agent Quality Flywheel: A Synthesis of the Framework
A great agent doesn't just perform; it improves. This discipline of continuous evaluation is
what separates a clever demo from an enterprise-grade system. This practice creates a
powerful, self-reinforcing system we call the Agent Quality Flywheel.
Think of it like starting a massive, heavy flywheel. The first push is the hardest. But the
structured practice of evaluation provides subsequent, consistent pushes. Each push adds
to the momentum until the wheel is spinning with unstoppable force, creating a virtuous cycle
of quality and trust. This flywheel is the operational embodiment of the entire framework
we've discussed.

Figure 6: The Agent Quality Flywheel

November 2025

45

Agent Quality

Here’s how the components from each chapter work together to build that momentum:
• Step 1: Define Quality (The Target): A flywheel needs a direction. As we defined in
Chapter 1, it all starts with the Four Pillars of Quality: Effectiveness, Cost-Efficiency, Safety,
and User Trust. These pillars are not abstract ideals; they are the concrete targets that
give our evaluation efforts meaning and align the flywheel with true business value.
• Step 2: Instrument for Visibility (The Foundation): You cannot manage what you
cannot see. As detailed in our chapter on Observability, we must instruct our agents to
produce structured Logs (the agent’s diary) and end-to-end Traces (the narrative thread).
This observability is the foundational practice that generates the rich evidence needed to
measure our Four Pillars, providing the essential fuel for the flywheel.
• Step 3: Evaluate the Process (The Engine): With visibility established, we can now judge
performance. As explored in our Evaluation chapter, this involves a strategic "outside-in"
assessment, judging both the final Output and the entire reasoning Process. This is the
powerful push that spins the wheel - a hybrid engine using scalable LLM-as-a-Judge
systems for speed and the Human-in-the-Loop (HITL) "gold standard" for ground truth.
• Step 4: Architect the Feedback Loop (The Momentum): This is where the "evaluatableby-design" architecture from Chapter 1 comes to life. By building the critical feedback
loop, we ensure that every production failure, when captured and annotated, is
programmatically converted into a permanent regression test in our "Golden" Evaluation
Set. Every failure makes the system smarter, spinning the flywheel faster and driving
relentless, continuous improvement.

Three Core Principles for Building Trustworthy Agents
If you take nothing else away from this whitepaper, let it be these three principles. They
represent the foundational mindset for any leader aiming to build truly reliable autonomous
systems in this new, agentic state of the art.

November 2025

46

Agent Quality

• Principle 1: Treat Evaluation as an Architectural Pillar, Not a Final Step: Remember
the race car analogy from Chapter 1? You don't build a Formula 1 car and then bolt on
sensors. You design it from the ground up with telemetry ports. Agentic workloads
demand the same DevOps paradigm. Reliable agents are "evaluatable-by-design,"
instrumented from the first line of code to emit the logs and traces essential for judgment.
Quality is an architectural choice, not a final QA phase.
• Principle 2: The Trajectory is the Truth: For agents, the final answer is merely the last
sentence of a long story. As we established in our Evaluation chapter, the true measure
of an agent's logic, safety, and efficiency lies in its end-to-end "thought process" - the
trajectory. This is Process Evaluation. To truly understand why an agent succeeded or
failed, you must analyze this path. This is only possible through the deep Observability
practices we detailed in Chapter 3.
• Principle 3: The Human is the Arbiter: Automation is our tool for scale; humanity is
our source of truth. Automation, from LLM-as-a-Judge systems to safety classifiers,
is essential. However, as established in our deep dive on Human-in-the-Loop (HITL)
evaluation, the fundamental definition of "good," the validation of nuanced outputs, and
the final judgment on safety and fairness must be anchored to human values. An AI can
help grade the test, but a human writes the rubric and decides what an 'A+' really means.

The Future is Agentic - and Reliable
We are at the dawn of the agentic era. The ability to create AI that can reason, plan, and act
will be one of the most transformative technological shifts of our time. But with great power
comes the profound responsibility to build systems that are worthy of our trust.
Mastering the concepts in this whitepaper - what one can call "Evaluation Engineering"
- is the key competitive differentiator for the next wave of AI. Organizations that continue
to treat agent quality as an afterthought will be stuck in a cycle of promising demos and

November 2025

47

Agent Quality

failed deployments. In contrast, those who invest in this rigorous, architecturally-integrated
approach to evaluation will be the ones who move beyond the hype to deploy truly
transformative, enterprise-grade AI systems.
The ultimate goal is not just to build agents that work, but to build agents that are trusted.
And that trust, as we have shown, is not a matter of hope or chance. It is forged in the
crucible of continuous, comprehensive, and architecturally-sound evaluation.

November 2025

48

Agent Quality

References
Academic Papers, Books, & Formal Reports
1.

Lewis, P., Perez, E., Piktus, A., Petroni, F., Karpukhin, V., Goyal, N., ... & Rocktäschel, T. (2020). RetrievalAugmented Generation for Knowledge-Intensive NLP Tasks. Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 33, 9459-9474.

2. Lin, S., Hilton, J., & Evans, O. (2022). TruthfulQA: Measuring how models mimic human falsehoods. In
Proceedings of the 60th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1:
Long Papers) (pp. 3214–3252).
3. Li, D., Jiang, B., Huang, L., Beigi, A., Zhao, C., Tan, Z.,... & Liu, H. (2024). From Generation to Judgment:
Opportunities and Challenges of LLM-as-a-judge. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.16594.
4. Zhuge, M., Wang, M., Shen, X., Zhang, Y., Wang, Y., Zhang, C., ... & Liu, N. (2024). Agent-as-a-Judge: Evaluate
Agents with Agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.10934.Amodei, D., Olah, C., Steinhardt, J., Christiano, P.,
Schulman, J., & Mané, D. (2016). Concrete Problems in AI Safety. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.06565.
Baysan, M. S., Uysal, S., İşlek, İ., Çığ Karaman, Ç., & Güngör, T. (2025). LLM-as-a-Judge: automated evaluation of
search query parsing using large language models. Frontiers in Big Data, 8.
Available at: https://doi.org/10.3389/fdata.2025.1611389.
Felderer, M., & Ramler, R. (2021). Quality Assurance for AI-Based Systems: Overview and Challenges. In Software
Quality: The Complexity and Challenges of Software Engineering and Software Quality in the Cloud (pp. 38-51).
Springer International Publishing.
Hendrycks, D., Carlini, N., Schulman, J., & Steinhardt, J. (2023). Unsolved Problems in ML Safety. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2306.04944.
Ji, Z., Lee, N., Fries, R., Yu, T., Su, D., Xu, Y.,... & Fung, P. (2023). AI-generated text: A survey of tasks, evaluation
criteria, and methods. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.07233.
Lin, C. Y. (2004). ROUGE: A package for automatic evaluation of summaries. In Proceedings of the ACL-04
workshop on text summarization branches out (pp. 74-81).
National Institute of Standards and Technology. (2023). AI Risk Management Framework (AI RMF 1.0). U.S.
Department of Commerce.

November 2025

49

Agent Quality

Papineni, K., Roukos, S., Ward, T., & Zhu, W. J. (2002). BLEU: a method for automatic evaluation of machine
translation. In Proceedings of the 40th annual meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics
(pp. 311-318).
Retzlaff, C., Das, S., Wayllace, C., Mousavi, P., Afshari, M., Yang, T., ... & Holzinger, A. (2024). Human-in-the-Loop
Reinforcement Learning: A Survey and Position on Requirements, Challenges, and Opportunities. Journal of
Artificial Intelligence Research, 79, 359-415.
Slattery, F., Costello, E., & Holland, J. (2024). A taxonomy of risks posed by language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2401.12903.
Taylor, M. E. (2023). Reinforcement Learning Requires Human-in-the-Loop Framing and Approaches. Paper
presented at the Adaptive and Learning Agents (ALA) Workshop 2023.
Wei, J., Wang, X., Schuurmans, D., Bosma, M., Xia, F., Chi, E.,... & Zhou, D. (2022). Chain-of-thought prompting
elicits reasoning in large language models. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35, 24824-24837.
Zhang, T., Kishore, V., Wu, F., Weinberger, K. Q., & Artzi, Y. (2020). BERTScore: Evaluating text generation with
BERT. In International Conference on Learning Representations.

Web Articles, Blog Posts, & General Web Pages
Bunnyshell. (n.d.). LLM-as-a-Judge: How AI Can Evaluate AI Faster and Smarter. Retrieved September 16, 2025,
from https://www.bunnyshell.com/blog/when-ai-becomes-the-judge-understanding-llm-as-a-j/.
Coralogix. (n.d.). OpenTelemetry for AI: Tracing Prompts, Tools, and Inferences. Retrieved September 16, 2025,
from https://coralogix.com/ai-blog/opentelemetry-for-ai-tracing-prompts-tools-and-inferences/.
Drapkin, A. (2025, September 2). AI Gone Wrong: The Errors, Mistakes, and Hallucinations of AI (2023 – 2025).
Tech.co. Retrieved September 16, 2025, from https://tech.co/news/list-ai-failures-mistakes-errors.
Dynatrace. (n.d.). What is OpenTelemetry? An open-source standard for logs, metrics, and traces. Retrieved
September 16, 2025, from https://www.dynatrace.com/news/blog/what-is-opentelemetry/.
Galileo. (n.d.). Comprehensive Guide to LLM-as-a-Judge Evaluation. Retrieved September 16, 2025,
from https://galileo.ai/blog/llm-as-a-judge-guide-evaluation.

November 2025

50

Agent Quality

Gofast.ai. (n.d.). Agent Hallucinations in the Real World: When AI Tools Go Wrong. Retrieved September 16, 2025,
from https://www.gofast.ai/blog/ai-bias-fairness-agent-hallucinations-validation-drift-2025.
IBM. (2025, February 25). What is LLM Observability? Retrieved September 16, 2025,
from https://www.ibm.com/think/topics/llm-observability.
MIT Sloan Teaching & Learning Technologies. (n.d.). When AI Gets It Wrong:
Addressing AI Hallucinations and Bias. Retrieved September 16, 2025,
from https://mitsloanedtech.mit.edu/ai/basics/addressing-ai-hallucinations-and-bias/.
ResearchGate. (n.d.). (PDF) A Survey on LLM-as-a-Judge. Retrieved September 16, 2025,
from https://www.researchgate.net/publication/386112851_A_Survey_on_LLM-as-a-Judge.
TrustArc. (n.d.). The National Institute of Standards and Technology (NIST) Artificial Intelligence Risk
Management. Retrieved September 16, 2025, from https://trustarc.com/regulations/nist-ai-rmf/.

November 2025

51

